feat: Add Longhorn V2 Data Engine (#653)
harvester/docs: docs/advanced/longhorn-v2.md

---
id: longhorn-v2
sidebar_position: 11
sidebar_label: Longhorn V2 Data Engine
title: "Longhorn V2 Data Engine"
Description: How to enable and use the Longhorn V2 Data Engine
---

<head>
  <link rel="canonical" href="https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.4/advanced/longhorn-v2"/>
</head>

Longhorn's V2 Data Engine harnesses the power of the Storage Performance Development Kit (SPDK) to elevate its overall performance. The integration significantly reduces I/O latency while simultaneously boosting IOPS and throughput. The enhancement provides a high-performance storage solution capable of meeting diverse workload demands.

:::note

- The Longhorn V2 Data engine is a **Technical Preview** in Harvester v1.4.0.

> :::

Author: > Can the V2DE be used in production environments?

Good point, I'll add that (also we're changing it from "Preview" to "Experimental" for v1.4.0)

## Prerequisities

Every node on which the Longhorn V2 Data Engine is active requires the following dedicated resources:

- 1 CPU core for use by the Longhorn instance-manager pod
- 2 GiB RAM (this will be allocated as 1024 × 2GiB hugepages)

> - At least one NVMe disk for data storage

Author: > Item 3: Should we say "local NVMe disk" to match what's in the [Longhorn doc](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.7.0/v2-data-engine/prerequisites/#disk)?

Yeah, probably :-) will do.

## Limitations

The Longhorn V2 Data Engine does not yet support the following functionality:

- Backing Images
- Live Migration
- Volume Clone
- Volume Encryption
- Volume Expansion

Within the context of Harvester, this means that volumes backed by the Longhorn V2 data engine must be added to virutal machines as additional disks. The boot disk of each VM still needs to come from a VM image backed by the Longhorn V1 Data Engine.

> VMs with Longhorn V2 volumes attached cannot be live migrated, nor is snapshot functionality available, as snapshot restore within Harvester relies on volume clone functionality.

Reviewer: Alex wants me to use "virtual machine" instead of "VM" across the board.

## Using the Longhorn V2 Data Engine

1. To enable the Longhorn V2 Data Engine, go to the **Advanced** > **Settings** screen and set `longhorn-v2-data-engine-enabled` to `true`. This will automatically load the kernel modules necessary for the Longhorn V2 data engine, and will attempt to allocate 1024 × 2MiB-sized huge pages (i.e. 2GiB of RAM) on all nodes. If you see "not enough hugepages-2Mi capacity" errors when applying this setting, wait a minute for the error to clear. If the error remains, reboot the affected node(s).

   Changing this setting will restart RKE2 on all nodes. This will not affect running VM workloads.

   If you wish to selectively disable the Longhorn V2 data engine on some nodes (for example on nodes with less CPU and/or RAM), go to the **Hosts** screen and add the label `node.longhorn.io/disable-v2-data-engine` with value `true` to those nodes.

> 2. Go to the **Hosts** screen and add extra disks to each node as described in [Multi-disk Management](../host/host.md#multi-disk-management). Set the additional disk's `Provisioner` to `Longhorn V2 (CSI)`.

Reviewer 2: We can also add some screenshots in the multidisk management page for LVM/v2 volumes.

> 2. Go to the **Hosts** screen and add extra disks to each node as described in [Multi-disk Management](../host/host.md#multi-disk-management). Set the additional disk's `Provisioner` to `Longhorn V2 (CSI)`.

Reviewer: `Provisioner` is not mentioned in [Multi-disk Management](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.4/host/#multi-disk-management).

> 2. Go to the **Hosts** screen and add extra disks to each node as described in [Multi-disk Management](../host/host.md#multi-disk-management). Set the additional disk's `Provisioner` to `Longhorn V2 (CSI)`.

Author: > `Provisioner` is not mentioned in [Multi-disk Management](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.4/host/#multi-disk-management).

I wanted to do that separately because it also needs to mention LVM as a possible provisioner.

> 3. Go to the **Advanced** > **Storage Classes** screen a new storage classs as described in [Creating a Storage Class](storageclass.md#creating-a-storageclass). As with adding disks, set the `Provisioner` to `Longhorn V2 (CSI)`.

Reviewer: `Provisioner` is not mentioned in [StorageClass](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.4/advanced/storageclass/).

> 3. Go to the **Advanced** > **Storage Classes** screen a new storage classs as described in [Creating a Storage Class](storageclass.md#creating-a-storageclass). As with adding disks, set the `Provisioner` to `Longhorn V2 (CSI)`.

Author: > `Provisioner` is not mentioned in [StorageClass](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.4/advanced/storageclass/).

I wanted to do that separately because it also needs to mention LVM as a possible provisioner.

1. On the Harvester UI, go to **Advanced** > **Settings**.

1. Set `longhorn-v2-data-engine-enabled` to `true`.

  Harvester automatically loads the kernel modules required by the Longhorn V2 Data Engine, and attempts to allocate 1024 × 2 MiB-sized huge pages (for example, 2 GiB of RAM) on all nodes. 

  Changing this setting automatically restarts RKE2 on all nodes but does not affect running virtual machine workloads.

  :::tip

  If you encounter error messages that include the phrase "not enough hugepages-2Mi capacity", allow some time for the error to be resolved. If the error persists, reboot the affected nodes.
  
  To disable the Longhorn V2 Data Engine on specific nodes (for example, nodes with less processing and memory resources), go to the **Hosts** screen and add the following label to the target nodes:

    - label: `node.longhorn.io/disable-v2-data-engine`
    - value: `true`

  :::

1. Go to the **Hosts** screen, and then add extra disks to each node as described in [Multi-disk Management](../host/host.md#multi-disk-management). 

  Set the `Provisioner` of each extra disk to `Longhorn V2 (CSI)`.

>   :::note
> 
>   Harvester sets the Longhorn disk driver to "auto" as described in [the Longhorn documentation](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.7.2/v2-data-engine/features/node-disk-support/). This means that NVMe disks will use the nvme bdev driver which provides the best performance. If testing with non-NVMe disks (e.g. SSDs), note that these will fall back to using the aio bdev driver, which requires that the disk size be an even multiple of 4096 bytes. Non-NVMe disks that do not meet this size constraint will not be added successfully.
>   :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :::note

  Harvester sets the [Longhorn disk driver](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.7.2/v2-data-engine/features/node-disk-support/) to `auto` so that NVMe disks use the SPDK NVMe bdev driver, which provides the best performance.
  
  SSDs and other non-NVMe disks are managed using the SPDK AIO bdev driver, which requires a disk size that is an *even multiple of 4096 bytes*. Non-NVMe disks that do not meet this size requirement cannot be added.

  :::
```

Reviewer: I added "SPDK" to the driver names because those seem to be official terms in the [SPDK doc](https://spdk.io/doc/bdev.html).
